                                                                SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

                                        Structural Intervention Distance (SID) for Evaluating Causal
                                                                                Graphs

                                        Jonas Peters                peters@stat.math.ethz.ch
                                        Peter Bu¨hlmann         buhlmann@stat.math.ethz.ch
                                        Seminar for Statistics
arXiv:1306.1043v2 [stat.ML] 7 Apr 2014  ETH Zurich
                                        Switzerland

                                        Editor: ??

                                                                                        Abstract

                                               Causal inference relies on the structure of a graph, often a directed acyclic graph (DAG).
                                              Diﬀerent graphs may result in diﬀerent causal inference statements and diﬀerent inter-
                                              vention distributions. To quantify such diﬀerences, we propose a (pre-) distance between
                                              DAGs, the structural intervention distance (SID). The SID is based on a graphical criterion
                                              only and quantiﬁes the closeness between two DAGs in terms of their corresponding causal
                                              inference statements. It is therefore well-suited for evaluating graphs that are used for com-
                                              puting interventions. Instead of DAGs it is also possible to compare CPDAGs, completed
                                              partially directed acyclic graphs that represent Markov equivalence classes. Since it diﬀers
                                              signiﬁcantly from the popular Structural Hamming Distance (SHD), the SID constitutes a
                                              valuable additional measure. We discuss properties of this distance and provide an eﬃcient
                                              implementation with software code available on the ﬁrst author’s homepage (an R package
                                              is under construction).

                                        1. Introduction

                                        Given a true causal DAG G, we want to assess the goodness of an estimate H: more
                                        generally, we want to measure closeness between two DAGs G and H. The Structural
                                        Hamming Distance (SHD, see Deﬁnition 1) counts the number of incorrect edges. Although
                                        this provides an intuitive distance between graphs, it does not reﬂect their capacity for
                                        causal inference. Instead, we propose to count the pairs of vertices (i, j), for which the
                                        estimate H correctly predicts intervention distributions within the class of distributions
                                        that are Markov with respect to G. This results in a new (pre-)distance between DAGs,
                                        the Structural Intervention Distance, which adds valuable additional information to the
                                        established SHD. We are not aware of any directly related idea.

                                            Throughout this work we consider a ﬁnite family of random variables X = (X1, . . . , Xp)
                                        with index set V := {1, . . . , p} (we use capital letters for random variables and bold letters
                                        for sets or vectors). We denote their joint distribution by L(X) and denote corresponding
                                        densities of L(X) with respect to Lebesgue or the counting measure, by p(·) (implicitly
                                        assuming their existence). We also denote conditional densities and the density of L(Z)
                                        with Z ⊂ X by p(·). A graph G = (V, E) consists of nodes V and edges E ⊆ V2. With
                                        a slight abuse of notation we sometimes identify the nodes (or vertices) j ∈ V with the

                                                                                                        1
                                            J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

variables Xj. In Appendix A, we provide further terminology regarding directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) (e.g. Lauritzen, 1996; Spirtes et al., 2000; Koller and Friedman, 2009) which
we require in our work.

    The rest of this article is organized as follows: Sections 1.1 and 1.2 review the Struc-
tural Hamming Distance and the do calculus (e.g. Pearl, 2009), respectively. In Section 2
we introduce the new structural intervention distance, prove some of its properties and pro-
vide possible extensions. Section 3 contains experiments on synthetic data and Section 4
describes an eﬃcient implementation of the SID.

1.1 Structural Hamming Distance
The Structural Hamming Distance (Acid and de Campos, 2003; Tsamardinos et al., 2006)
considers two partially directed acyclic graphs (PDAGs, see appendix) and counts how
many edges do not coincide.

Deﬁnition 1 (Structural Hamming Distance) Let P be the space of PDAGs over p
variables. The Structural Hamming Distance (SHD) is deﬁned as

           SHD : P × P → N
                    (G, H) → #{ (i, j) ∈ V2 | G and H do not have the same type
                                                          of edge between i and j} ,

where edge types are deﬁned in Appendix A.

Equivalently, we count pairs (i, j), such that ((i, j) ∈ EG∆EH) or ((j, i) ∈ EG∆EH), where
A∆B := (A \ B) ∪ (B \ A) is the symmetric diﬀerence. Deﬁnition 1 includes a distance
between two DAGs since these are special cases of PDAGs. In this work, the SHD is pri-
marily used as a measure of reference when comparing with our new structural intervention
distance. A comparison to other but similar structural distances (e.g. counting only missing
edges) can be found in de Jongh and Druzdzel (2009); all distances they consider are of
similar type as SHD.

1.2 Intervention Distributions
Assume that L(X) is absolutely continuous with respect to a product measure. Then, L(X)
is Markov with respect to G if and only if the joint density factorizes according to

                                                                                    p

                                       p(x1, . . . , xp) = p(xj | xpaj ),

                                                                                  j=1

see for example Lauritzen (1996, Thm 3.27). The intervention distribution given do(Xi =
xˆi) is then deﬁned as

                       pG(x1, . . . , xp | do(Xi = xˆi)) = p(xj | xpaj )δ(xi = xˆi) .

                                                                                       j=i

This, again, is a probability distribution. We can therefore take expectations or marginalize
over some of the variables. One can check (see proof of Proposition 6) that this deﬁnition

                                                                2
SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

implies1 pG(y | do(X = xˆ)) = p(y) if Y is a parent (or non-descendant) of X; intervening
on X does not show any eﬀect on the distribution of Y . If Y is not a parent of X, we can
compute (marginalized) intervention distributions by taking into account only a subset of
variables from the graph (Pearl, 2009, Thm 3.2.2).

Proposition 2 (Adjustment Formula for Parents) Let X = Y be two diﬀerent nodes
in G. If Y is a parent of X then

                                pG(y | do(X = xˆ)) = p(y) .  (1)

If Y is not a parent of X then

pG(y | do(X = xˆ)) = p(y | xˆ, paX ) p(paX ) .               (2)

                                   paX

Whenever we can compute the marginalized intervention distribution p(y | do(X = xˆ)) by

a summation z p(y | xˆ, z) p(z) as in (2), we call the set Z a valid adjustment set for the
intervention Y | do(X). Proposition 2 states that Z = PAXG is a valid adjustment set for
Y | do(X) (for any Y ). Figure 1 shows that for a given graph there may be other possible

adjustment sets.

                                Q       P

                                   XBY

                                A       W

Figure 1: The sets Z = {P, Q} and Z = {P, A} are valid adjustment sets for Y | do(X);
             Z = {P } is the smallest adjustment set. Any set containing W , however, cannot
             be a valid adjustment set (see Lemma 5 below).

2. Structural Intervention Distance

2.1 Motivation and Deﬁnition

We propose a new graph-based (pre-)metric, the Structural Intervention Distance (SID).
When comparing graphs (or DAGs in particular), there are many (pre-)metrics one could
consider: an appropriate choice should depend on the further usage and purpose of the
graphs. Often one is interested in a causal interpretation of a graph that enables us to predict
the result of interventions. We then require a distance that takes this important goal into
account. From now on we implicitly assume that an intervention distribution is computed
using adjustment for parents as in Proposition 2; we discuss other choices of adjustment

 1. We sometimes use diﬀerent letters for the variables in order to avoid subscripts.

                                                                3
                          J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

sets in Section 2.4.5. The following Example 1 shows that the SHD (Deﬁnition 1) is not
well suited for capturing aspects of the graph that are related to intervention distributions.

Example 1 Figure 2 shows a true graph G (left) and two diﬀerent graphs (e.g. estimates)
H1 (center) and H2 (right). The only diﬀerence between H1 and G is the additional edge

Y1                                     Y1                                 Y1

X1 X2 Y2                  X1 X2 Y2                            X1 X2 Y2

               Y3                                Y3                                    Y3
true graph G                        graph H1                              graph H2

Figure 2: Two graphs (center and right) that have the same SHD to the true graph (left),
             but diﬀer in the SID.

Y1 → Y2, the only diﬀerence between H2 and G is the reversed edge between X1 and X2.
The SHD between the true DAG and the others is therefore one in both cases:

                   SHD(G, H1) = 1 = SHD(G, H2) .

We now consider a distribution p(.) that is Markov with respect to G and compute all in-
tervention distributions using parent adjustment (2). We will see that these two “mistakes”
have diﬀerent impact on the correctness of those intervention distributions.

    First, we consider the DAG H1. All nodes except for Y2 have the same parent sets in
G and H1 and thus, the parent adjustment implies exactly the same formula. Since X1 and
X2 are parents of Y2 in both graphs, also the intervention distributions from Y2 to X1 and
X2 are correct. We will now argue why G and H agree on the intervention distribution from
Y2 to Y3 and from Y2 to Y1. When computing the intervention distribution from Y2 to Y3 in
H1, we adjust not only for {X1, X2} as done in G but also for the additional parent Y1. We
thus have to check whether {X1, X2, Y1} is a valid adjustment set for Y3 | do(Y2). Indeed,
since Y2 ⊥⊥ Y1 | {X1, X2} (the distribution is Markov with respect to G) we have:

pH1(y3 | do(Y2 = yˆ2)) =            p(y3 | x1, x2, y1, yˆ2)p(x1, x2, y1)

                          x1,x2,y1

                   =                p(x1, x2, y1, yˆ2, y3) =  p(x1, x2, y1, yˆ2, y3)

                          x1,x2,y1 p(yˆ2 | x1, x2, y1)        x1,x2,y1 p(yˆ2 | x1, x2)

                   = p(y3 | x1, x2, yˆ2)p(x1, x2) = pG(y3 | do(Y2 = yˆ2))

                       x1,x2

It remains to show that pG(y1 | do(Y2 = yˆ2)) = p(y1) = pH1(y1 | do(Y2 = yˆ2)), where the last
equality is given by (1). But since Y1 ⊥⊥ | X1, X2 it follows from the parent adjustment (2)
that pG(y1 | do(Y2 = yˆ2)) = p(y1). Thus, all intervention distributions computed in H1 agree
with those computed in G. Proposition 7 shows that this is not a coincidence. It proves

                                    4
                                     SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

that all estimates for which the true DAG is a subgraph correctly predict the intervention
distributions.

    The “mistake” in graph H2, namely the reversed edge, is more severe. For computing
the correct intervention distribution from X2 to Y1, for example, we need to adjust for the
confounder X1, as suggested by the parent adjustment (2) applied to G. In H2, however, X2
does not have any parent, so there is no variable adjusted for. In general, H2 therefore leads
to a wrong intervention distribution pH2(y1 | do(X2 = xˆ2)) = pG(y1 | do(X2 = xˆ2)). Also,
when computing the intervention distribution from X1 to Yi, i = 1, 2, 3, we are adjusting for
X2, which is now a parent of X1 in H2. Again, this may lead to pH2(yi | do(X1 = xˆ1)) =
pG(yi | do(X1 = xˆ1)). Further, the intervention distributions from X1 to X2 and from X2
to X1 may not be correct, either. In fact, H2 makes eight erroneous predictions for many
observational distributions p(.).

    The preceding deliberations are reﬂected by the structural intervention distance we pro-
pose below (Deﬁnition 4). We will see that

                                     SID(G, H1) = 0 = 8 = SID(G, H2) .

Furthermore, Proposition 6 below shows us how to read oﬀ the SID from the graph structures.

    The following argumentation motivates the formal deﬁntion of the SID. Given a true
DAG G and an estimate H, we would like to count the number of intervention distributions,
which are computed using the structure of H, that coincide with the “true” intervention
distributions inferred from G. This number, however, depends on the observational dis-
tribution over all variables. Since we regard G as the ground truth we assume that the
observational distribution is Markov with respect to G. Consider now a speciﬁc distribution
that factorizes over all nodes, i.e. all variables are independent (this distribution is certainly
Markov with respect to G). Then, G and H agree on all intervention distributions, even
though their structure can be arbitrarily diﬀerent. We therefore consider all distributions
that are Markov with respect to G instead of only one: we count all pairs of nodes, for which
the predicted interventions agree for all observational distributions that are Markov with
respect to G. Those pairs are said to “correctly estimate” the intervention distribution.

Deﬁnition 3 Let G and H be DAGs over variables X = (X1, . . . , Xp). For i = j we say
that the intervention distribution from i to j is correctly inferred by H with respect to G if

         pG(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) = pH(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) ∀L(X) Markov wrt G and ∀xˆi

Otherwise, that is if

      ∃L(X) Markov wrt G and xˆi with pG(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) = pH(xj | do(Xi = xˆi))

we call the intervention distribution from i to j falsely inferred by H with respect to G.
Here, pG and pH are computed using parent adjustment as in Proposition 2 (Section 2.4.5
discusses an alternative to parent adjustment).

The SID counts the number of falsely inferred intervention distributions. The deﬁnition is
independent of any distribution which is crucial to allow for a purely graphical characteri-
zation.

                                                                5
                 J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

Deﬁnition 4 (Structural Intervention Distance) Let G be the space of DAGs over p
variables. We then deﬁne

SID : G × G → N

(G, H) → #{ (i, j), i = j | the intervention distribution from i to j                 (3)

                                is falsely estimated by H with respect to G}

as the structural intervention distance (SID).

Although the SID is a (pre-)metric, see Section 2.3, it does not satisfy all properties of a
metric, in particular it is not symmetric (see Section 2.4.4 for a symmetrized version).

2.2 An Equivalent Formulation

The SID as deﬁned in (3) is diﬃcult to compute. We now provide an equivalent formulation
that is based on graphical criteria only. We will see that for each pair (i, j) the question
becomes whether PAHXi is a valid adjustment set for the intervention Xj | do(Xi) in graph
G. Shpitser et al. (2010) prove the following characterization of adjustment sets. The reader
may think of Z = PAGX , which is always a valid adjustment set, as stated in Proposition 2.

Lemma 5 (Characterization of valid Adjustment Sets) Consider a DAG G = (V, E),
variables X, Y ∈ V and a subset Z ⊂ V\{X, Y }. Consider the property of Z w.r.t. (G, X, Y )

(∗)  In G, no Z ∈ Z is a descendant of any W which lies on a directed
     path from X to Y and Z blocks all non-directed paths from X to Y.

We then have the following two statements:

(i) Let L(X) be Markov with respect to G. If Z satisﬁes (∗) w.r.t. (G, X, Y ), then Z is a
    valid adjustment set for Y | do(X).

 (ii) If Z does not satisfy (∗) w.r.t. (G, X, Y ), then there exists L(X) that is Markov with
       respect to G that leads to pG(y | do(X = xˆ)) = z p(y | xˆ, z) p(z), meaning Z is not a
       valid adjustment set.

If Y ∈ PAGX , then Z = PAGX satisﬁes condition (∗) and statement (i) reduces to Proposi-
tion 2. In fact, condition (∗) is a slight extension of the backdoor criterion (Pearl, 2009). It
is not surprising that other sets than the parent set work, too. We may adjust for children
of X, for example, as long as they are not part of a directed path, see Figure 1 above.
Similarly, we do not have to adjust for parents of X for which all unblocked paths to Y lead
through X.

    Using Lemma 5 we obtain the following equivalent deﬁnition of the SID, which is entirely
graph-based and will later be exploited for computation.

Proposition 6 The SID has the following equivalent deﬁnition.

SID(G, H) = #  (i, j), i = j |                    j ∈ DEGi               if j ∈ PAHi
                                PAiH does not satisfy (∗) for (G, i, j)  if j ∈ PAHi

The proof is provided in Appendix B; it is based on Lemma 5.

                                            6
                                     SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

2.3 Properties

We ﬁrst investigate metric properties of the SID. Let us denote the number of nodes in a
graph by p (this is overloading notation but does not lead to any ambiguity). We then have
that

                                          0 ≤ SID(G, H) ≤ p · (p − 1)

and
                                           G = H ⇒ SID(G, H) = 0.

The SID therefore satisﬁes the properties of what is sometimes called a pre-metric2.
    The SID is not symmetric: e.g., for a non-empty graph G and an empty graph H, we

have that SID(G, H) = 0 = SID(H, G) (if G is the empty DAG, all sets of nodes satisfy (∗)
and are therefore valid adjustment sets).

    If SID(G, H) = 0 parent adjustment leads to the same intervention distributions in G
and H but it does not necessarily hold that G = H. Example 1 shows graphs G = H1
with SID(G, H1) = 0. Using Proposition 6, we can characterize the set of DAGs that have
structural intervention distance zero to a given true DAG G:

Proposition 7 Consider two DAGs G and H. We then have

                                        SID(G, H) = 0 ⇔ G ≤ H

Here, G ≤ H means that G is a subgraph of H (see Appendix A). The proof is provided
in Appendix C; it works for any type of adjustment set, not just the parent set (see Sec-
tion 2.4.5). Proposition 7 states that H can contain many more (additional) edges than G
and still receives an SID of zero. Intuitively, the SID counts the number of pairs (i, j), such
that the intervention distribution inferred from the graph H is wrong; the latter happens
if the estimated set of parents PAXHi is not a valid adjustment set in G. If an estimate
H contains strictly too many edges, i.e. G ≤ H and paXG i ⊆ paXHi for all i, the inter-
vention distributions are correct; this follows from p(xj | xi, paHXi) = p(xj | xi, paXG i), see
also Lemma 5. For computing intervention distributions in practice, we have to estimate
p(xj | xi, paXHi) based on ﬁnitely many samples. This can be seen as a regression task, a
well-understood problem in statistics. It is therefore a question of the regression or feature
selection technique, whether we see this equality (at least approximately) in practice as
well. Section 2.4.3 shows a simple way to combine the SID with another measure in order
to obtain zero distance if and only if the two graphs coincide.

    The following proposition provides loose and sharp bounds when relating SID to the
SHD: they underline the diﬀerence between these two measures. The proof is provided in
Appendix D.

Proposition 8 (Relating SID and SHD) Consider two DAGs G and H.

(1a) When the SHD is zero, the SID is zero, too:

                                        SHD(G, H) = 0 =⇒ SID(G, H) = 0

 2. A function d : G × G → R is called a premetric if d(a, b) ≥ 0 and d(a, a) = 0.

                                                                7
                        J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

(1b) We have

                  SHD(G, H) = 1 =⇒ SID(G, H) ≤ 2 · (p − 1) .

This bound is sharp.

(2) There exists G and H such that SID(G, H) = 0 but SHD(G, H) = p(p − 1)/2 which
     achieves the maximal possible value. Therefore we cannot bound SHD from SID.

2.4 Extensions

2.4.1 SID between a DAG and a CPDAG

Let C denote the space of CPDAGs (completed partially directed acyclic graphs) over p
variables. Some causal inference methods like the PC-algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2000) or

Greedy Equivalence Search (Chickering, 2002) do not output a single DAG, but rather a
completed PDAG C ∈ C representing a Markov equivalence class of DAGs. In order to
compute the SID between a (true) DAG G and an (estimated) PDAG, we can in principle

enumerate all DAGs in the Markov equivalence class and compute the SID for each single
DAG. This way, we obtain a vector of distances, instead of a single number, and we can
compute lower and upper bounds for these distances.

    Since the enumeration becomes computationally infeasible with large graph size, we
propose to extend the CPDAG locally. Especially for sparse graphs, this provides a con-
siderable computational speed-up. We make use of the fact that the PDAG C represents

a Markov equivalence class of DAGs only if each chain component is chordal (Andersson
et al., 1997). We extend each chordal chain component c (see Section A) locally to all
possible DAGs Cc,1, . . . , Cc,k, leaving the other chain components undirected (Meek, 1995).
For each extension Cc,h (1 ≤ h ≤ k) and for each vertex i within the chain component c, we
consider

I(G, Cc,h)i := #  j=i|                    Xj ∈ DEGXi                         if Xj ∈ PACXci,h  .
                        PAXCci,h does not satisfy (∗) for graph G            if Xj ∈ PACXci,h

For each chain component c, we thus obtain k vectors I(G, Cc,1), . . . , I(G, Cc,k) each having
#c entries. We then represent each vector with its sum

                                S(G, Cc,h) = I(G, Cc,h)i (h = 1, . . . , k)

                                                                    i∈c

and save the minimum and the maximum over the k values

                        min S(G, Cc,h), max S(G, Cc,h) .
                        h                h

These values correspond to the “best” and “worst” DAG extensions. We then report the
sum over all minima and the sum over all maxima as lower and upper bound, respectively

SIDlower(G, C) = min S(G, Cc,h), SIDupper(G, C) = max S(G, Cc,h) .
                        ch                                ch

This leads to the extended deﬁnition

                  SID : G × C → N × N                                                          (4)
                           (G, C) → SIDlower(G, C), SIDupper(G, C)

                                      8
                           SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

The deﬁnition guarantees that the neighborhood orientation of two nodes do not contradict
each other. Both the lower and upper bounds are therefore met by a DAG member in the
equivalence class of C.

    The diﬀerences between lower and upper bounds can be quite large. If the true DAG is
a (Markov) chain X1 → . . . → Xp of length p, the corresponding equivalence class contains
the correct DAG resulting in an SID of zero (lower bound); it also includes the reversed
chain X1 ← . . . ← Xp resulting in a maximal SID of p · (p − 1).

    In order to provide a better intuition for these lower and upper bounds we relate them
to “strictly identiﬁable” intervention distributions in the Markov equivalence class.

Deﬁnition 9 Consider a completed partially directed graph C and let C1, . . . , Ck be the DAGs
contained in the Markov equivalence class represented by C. We say that the intervention
distribution from i to j is

• identiﬁable in C if pCg (xj | do(Xi = xi)) is the same for all Cg ∈ {C1, . . . , Ck} and for
   all distributions p(.) that are Markov with respect to C.

• strictly identiﬁable in C if pCg (xj | do(Xi = xi)) is the same for all Cg ∈ {C1, . . . , Ck}
   and for all distributions p(.).

• identiﬁable in C w.r.t. G if pCg (xj | do(Xi = xi)) is the same for all Cg ∈ {C1, . . . , Ck}
   and for all distributions p(.) that are Markov w.r.t. G.

Deﬁnition 3 further calls a (strictly) identiﬁable intervention distribution from i to j esti-
mated correctly if pG(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) = pC(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) for all L(X) that are Markov
with respect to G. With this notation we have the following remark, which is visualized by
Figure 3.

Remark 10 Given a true DAG G and an estimated CPDAG C. It then holds (see Figure 3)
that

#  interv. distr. that are  identiﬁable in C wrt G and     = SIDlower(G, C)
                            inferred falsely by C wrt G    = p · (p − 1) − SIDupper(G, C)
                                                           ≤ SIDlower(G, C)
# interv. distr. that are    identiﬁable in C wrt G and    ≤ p · (p − 1) − SIDupper(G, C) .
                            inferred correctly by C wrt G

# interv. distr. that are   strictly identiﬁable in C and
                             inferred falsely by C wrt G

# interv. distr. that are   strictly identiﬁable in C and
                            inferred correctly by C wrt G

Choosing the lower and upper bound to match intervention distributions that are identiﬁable
w.r.t. G (rather than being strictly identiﬁable) is a conservative choice. If we us the
estimated CPDAGs to provide us with candidate experiments that could reveal nodes with
a strong causal eﬀect, we do not want to miss good candidates.

    The procedure above fails if C is not a completed PDAG and therefore does not represent
a Markov equivalence class. This may happen for some versions of the PC algorithm, when
they are based on ﬁnitely many data or in the existence of hidden variables. For each node

                            9
J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

              p (p-1)   strictly identifiable
identifiable wrt G      and correct
and correct             SID

identifiable wrt G               upper
and false
                        SID
                     0           lower

                        strictly identifiable
                        and false

Figure 3: This is a visualization of Remark 10. It describes the SID between a DAG G and
             a CPDAG H.

i, we can then consider all subsets of undirected neighbors as possible parent sets and again
report lower and upper bounds. The same is done if the chain component is too large (with
more than eight nodes). These modiﬁcations are implemented in our R-code that is available
on the ﬁrst author’s homepage.

2.4.2 SID between a CPDAG and a DAG or CPDAG

If we simulate from a linear Gaussian SEM with diﬀerent error variances, for example,
we cannot hope to recover the correct DAG from the joint distribution. If we assume
faithfulness, however, it is possible to identify the correct Markov equivalence class. In
such situations, one may want to compare the estimated structure with the correct Markov
equivalence class (represented by a CPDAG) rather than with the correct DAG. Again, we
denote the space of CPDAGs by C. We have deﬁned the SID on G × G (Deﬁnition 4) and
on G × C (Section 2.4.1). We now want to extend the deﬁnition to C × G and C × C, where
we compare an estimated structure with a true CPDAG C. The CPDAG C represents a
Markov equivalence class that includes many diﬀerent DAGs G1, . . . , Gk. These diﬀerent
DAGs lead to diﬀerent intervention distributions. The main idea is therefore to consider
only those (i, j) for which the intervention distribution from i to j is identiﬁable in C
(Deﬁnition 9). Maathuis and Colombo (2013) introduce a generalized backdoor criterion
that can be used to characterize identiﬁability of intervention distributions. Lemma 11 is a
direct implication of their Corollary 4.2 and provides a graphical criterion in order to decide
whether an intervention distribution is identiﬁable in a CPDAG. To formulate the result,
we deﬁne that a path Xa1, . . . , Xas in a partially directed graph is possibly directed if no
edge between Xaf and Xaf+1, f ∈ {1, . . . , s − 1}, is pointing towards Xaf .

Lemma 11 Let Xi and Xj be two nodes in a CPDAG G. The intervention distribution
from i to j is not identiﬁable if and only if there is a possibly directed path from Xi to Xj
starting with an undirected edge.

                                                                10
SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

We then deﬁne

  SID : C × G → N
           (C, H) → #{ (i, j), i = j | the interv. distr from i to j is identif. in C
                                                                                                                    (5)
                                                 and ∃L(X) that is Markov wrt C1 ∈ C such that
                                                 pC1(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) = pH(xj | do(Xi = xˆi))}

In a DAG, all eﬀects are identiﬁable. The deﬁnitions then reduce to the case of DAGs (3)
and (4). The extension to SID : C×C → N×N is completely analogous to (4) in Section 2.4.1
with lower and upper bounds of the SID score (5) between a true CPDAG and all DAGs in
the estimated Markov equivalence class.

2.4.3 Penalizing additional edges

The estimated DAG may have strictly more edges than the true DAG and still receives
an SID of zero (Proposition 7). We have argued in Section 2.3 that for computing causal
inference this fact only introduces statistical problems that can be dealt with if the sample
size increases. In some practical situations, however, it may nevertheless be seen as an
unwanted side eﬀect. This problem can be addressed by introducing an additional distance
measuring the diﬀerence in number of edges between G and H.

DNE(G, H) = #edges in G − #edges in H .

Here, a directed or undirected edge counts as one edge. For any DAG G and any DAG H,
it then follows directly from Proposition 7 that

G = H ⇔ SID(G, H) = 0 and DNE(G, H) = 0 .

Analogously, we have for any DAG G and any CPDAG C

G ∈ C ⇔ SID(G, C) = 0 and DNE(G, C) = 0 .

                           lower

2.4.4 Symmetrization

We may also want to compare two DAGs G and H, where neither of them can be seen as
an estimate of the other. For these situations we suggest a symmetrized version of the SID:

SIDsymm(G, H) =  SID(G, H) + SID(H, G)              .

                     2

Although we believe that this version ﬁts most purposes in practice, there are other pos-
sibilities to construct symmetric versions of SID. As a slight modiﬁcation of Deﬁnition 4,
we may also count all pairs (i, j), such that the intervention distributions coincide for all
distributions that are Markov with respect to both graphs. Note that this would result in
a distance that is always zero if one of its arguments is the empty graph, for example.

2.4.5 Alternative Adjustment Sets

In this work we use the parent set for adjustment. Since it is easy to compute and depends
only on the neighbourhood of the intervened nodes it is widely used in practice. Any other

                 11
                                 J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

SID with minimal adjustment set     p = 5 with dense graphs
   0 5 10 15 20
                                                                    1200

                                                                    1000

                                                                    800

                                                                    600

                                                                    400

                                                                    200

                                                                    0

                                 0  5  10  15                   20

                                    SID with parent adjustment

Figure 4: The SID between two DAGs is similar when it is computed with parent adjust-
             ment or the minimal adjustment set.

method to compute adjustment sets in graphs can be used, too, of course. Choosing an
adjustment set of minimal size (see Figure 1) is more diﬃcult to compute but has the
advantage of a small conditioning set: Textor and Liskiewicz (2011) discuss recent advances
in eﬃcient computation. In contrast to the parent set, it depends on the whole graph.
Using the experimental setup from Section 3.1 below, we compare the SID computed with
parent adjustment with the SID computed with the minimal adjustment set for randomly
generated dense graphs of size p = 5. Since the minimal adjustment set need not be unique,
we decided to choose the smallest set that is found ﬁrst by the computational algorithm.
Figure 4 shows that the diﬀerences between the two values of SID, once computed with
parent sets and once computed with minimal adjustment sets, are rather small (especially
compared to the diﬀerences between SID and SHD, see Section 3.1). In about 70% of the
cases, they are exactly the same.

2.4.6 Hidden Variables (future work)

If some of the variables are unobserved, not all of the intervention distributions are iden-
tiﬁable from the true DAG. We provide a “road map” on how this case can be included
in the framework of the SID. As it was done for CPDAGs (Section 2.4.2) we can exclude
the non-identiﬁable pairs from the structural intervention distance. In the presence of hid-
den variables, the true structure can be represented by an acyclic directed mixed graph
(ADMG), for which Shpitser and Pearl (2006) address the characterization of identiﬁable
intervention distributions. Alternatively, we can regard a maximal ancestral graph (MAG)
(Richardson and Spirtes, 2002) as the ground truth, for which the characterization becomes
more diﬃcult. Methods like FCI (Spirtes et al., 2000) and its successors (Colombo et al.,
2012; Claassen et al., 2013) output an equivalence class of MAGs that are called partial
ancestral graphs (PAGs) (Richardson and Spirtes, 2002). To compare an estimated PAG
to the true MAG, we would again go through all MAGs represented by the PAG (see Sec-
tion 2.4.1) and provide lower and upper bounds (as in Section 2.4.1). Future work might
show that this can be done eﬃciently.

                                                                12
                          SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

2.4.7 Multiple Interventions (future work)

The structural intervention distance compares the two graph’s predictions of intervention

distributions. Until now, we have only considered interventions on single nodes. Instead,

one may also consider multiple interventions. A slightly modiﬁed version of Lemma 5 still

holds, but the (union of the) parent sets do not necessarily provide a valid adjustment set,

even for the true causal graph. Instead, one needs to deﬁne a “canonical” choice of a valid

adjustment set. Furthermore, given a method that computes a valid adjustment set in

the correct graph, one needs to handle the computational complexity that arises from the

large number of possible interventions: for each number k of multiplicity of interventions

there are 2k possible intervention sets and p − k possible target nodes j. In total we thus

have  p−1  p  (p − k)  =  p(2p−1  − 1)  intervention  distributions.  In practice, one may ﬁrst
      k=1  k

address the case of intervening on two nodes, where the number of possible intervention

distributions is p(p − 1)(p − 2)/2.

3. Simulations

3.1 SID versus SHD

For p = 5 and for p = 20 we sample 10, 000 pairs of random DAGs and compute both the
SID and the SHD between them. We consider two probabilities for iid sampling of edges,
namely pconnect = 1.5/(p − 1) (resulting in an expected number of 0.75p edges) for a sparse
setting and pconnect = 0.3 for a dense setting. Furthermore, the order of the variables is
chosen from a uniformly distributed permutation among the vertices. The left panels in
Figure 5 show two-dimensional histograms with SID and SHD. It is apparent that the SHD
and SID constitute very diﬀerent distance measures. For example, for SHD equal to a low
number such as one or two (see p = 5 in the dense case), the SID can take on very diﬀerent
values. This indicates, that compared to the SHD, the SID provides additional information
that are appropriate for causal inference. The observations are in par with the bounds
provided in Proposition 8.

    For each pair G and H of graphs we also generate a distribution by deﬁning a linear
structural equation model

                          Xj =          βjkXk + Nj ,  j = 1, . . . , p ,

                                k∈pajG

whose graph is identical to G. We sample the coeﬃcients βjk uniformly from [−1.0; −0.1]
∪ [0.1; 1.0]. The noise variables are normally distributed with mean zero and variance one.
Due to the assumption of equal error variances for the error terms, the DAG is identiﬁable
from the distribution (Peters and Bu¨hlmann, 2014). With the linear Gaussian choice we
can characterize the true intervention distribution p(xj | xˆi) by one number, namely the
derivative of the expectation with respect to xˆi (which is also called the total causal eﬀect
of Xi on Xj). Its derivation can be found in Appendix E. We can then compare the
intervention distributions from G and H and report the number of pairs (i, j), for which
these two numbers diﬀer. For numerical reasons we regard two numbers as diﬀerent if their
absolute diﬀerence is larger than 10−8. The right panels in Figure 5 show the comparison

                                        13
                                                J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

to the SID. In all of the 20, 000 cases, the SID counts exactly the number of those “wrong”
causal eﬀects. A priori this is not obvious since Deﬁnition 4 only requires that there exists
a distribution that discriminates between the intervention distributions. The result shown
in Figure 5 suggests that the intervention distributions diﬀer for most distributions. Two
possible reasons for inequality have indeed small probability: (1) a non-detectable diﬀerence
that is smaller than 10−8 and (2) vanishing coeﬃcients that would violate faithfulness
(Spirtes et al., 2000, Thm 3.2). We are not aware of a characterization of the distributions
that do not allow to discriminate between the intervention distributions.

                     p = 5 with dense graphs                                                    p = 5 with dense graphs

SHD                                                 350    # wrong causal effects                                              1200
   0 2 4 6 8 10                                               0 5 10 15 20
                                                    300                                                                        1000

                                                    250                                                                        800

                                                    200

                                                    150                                                                        600

                                                    100                                                                        400

                                                    50                                                                         200

                                                    0                                                                          0

                  0  5  10   15                 20                                           0  5  10   15                 20

                        SID                                                                        SID

                     p = 20 with sparse graphs                                                  p = 20 with sparse graphs

SHD                                                    20  # wrong causal effects  200                                         150
   0 10 20 30 40
                                                       15

                                                                                                                               100

                                                       10                          0 50 100

                                                       5                                                                       50

                                                       0                                                                       0

                  0  50 100 150 200                                                          0  50 100 150 200

                        SID                                                                        SID

Figure 5: We generate 10, 000 pairs of random small dense graphs (top) and larger sparse
             graphs (bottom). For each pair of graphs (G, H) we also generate a distribution
             which is Markov w.r.t G. The two-dimensional histograms compare SID(G, H)
             with SHD(G, H) (left) and SID(G, H) with the number of pairs (i, j), for which
             the calculated causal eﬀects diﬀer (right). The SID measures exactly the number
             of wrongly estimated causal eﬀects and thus provides additional and very diﬀerent
             information as the SHD.

3.2 Comparing Causal Inference Methods

As in Section 3.1 we simulate sparse random DAGs as ground truth (100 times for each
value of p and n). We again sample n data points from the corresponding linear Gaussian
structural equation model with equal error variances (as above coeﬃcients are uniformly
chosen from [−1; −0.1] ∪ [0.1; 1]) and apply diﬀerent inference methods. This setting allows

                                                                14
                                     SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

us to use the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2000), conservative PC (Ramsey et al., 2006),
greedy equivalent search (GES) (Chickering, 2002) and greedy DAG search based on the
assumption of equal error variances (GDSEEV) (Peters and Bu¨hlmann, 2014). Table 1
reports the average SID between the true DAG and the estimated ones. GDSEEV is the
only method that outputs a DAG. All other methods output a Markov equivalence class for
which we apply the extension suggested in Section 2.4.1. Additionally, we report the results
for a random estimator RAND that does not take into account any of the data: we sample
a DAG as in Section 3.1 but with pconnect uniformly chosen between 0 and 1. Section 2.4.1
provides an example, for which the SID can be very diﬀerent for two DAGs within the same
Markov equivalence class. Table 1 shows that this diﬀerence can be quite signiﬁcant even on
average. While the lower bound often corresponds to a reasonably good estimate, the upper
bound may not be better than random guessing for small sample sizes. In fact, for p = 5 and
n = 100, the distance to the RAND estimate was less than the upper bound for PC in 77 out
of the 100 experiments (not directly readable from the aggregated numbers in the table).
For the SHD, however, the PC algorithm outperforms random guessing; e.g., for p = 5 and
n = 100, RAND is better than PC in 8 out of 100 experiments. This supports the idea
that the PC algorithm estimates the skeleton of a DAG more reliably than the directions
of its edges. The results also show how much can be gained when additional assumptions
are appropriate; all methods exploit that the data come from a linear Gaussian SEM while
only GDSEEV makes use of the additional constraint of equal error variances, which leads
to identiﬁability of the DAG from the distribution (Peters and Bu¨hlmann, 2014). We draw
diﬀerent conclusions if we consider the SHD (see Table 2). For p = 40 and n = 100, for
example, PC performs best with respect to SHD while it is worst with respect to SID.

3.3 Scalability of the SID

For diﬀerent values of p we report here the processor time needed for computing the SID
between two random graphs with p nodes. We choose the same setting for sparse and
dense graphs as in Section 3.1. Figure 6 shows box plots for 100 pairs of graphs for each
value of p ranging between 5 and 50. The ﬁgure suggests that the time complexity scales
approximately quadratic and cubic in the number of nodes for sparse and dense graphs,
respectively3.

4. Implementation

We sketch here the implementation of the Structural Intervention Distance while details
are presented in Algorithms 1 and 2 in Appendix F using pseudo code. The key idea of
our algorithm is based on Proposition 6. Condition (∗) contains two parts that need to
be checked. Part (1) addressed the issue whether any node from the conditioning set is a
descendant of any node on a directed path (see line 28 in Algorithm 1). Here, we make use
of the p × p PathMatrix: its entry (i, j) is one if and only if there is a directed path from
i to j. This can be computed eﬃciently by squaring the matrix (Id + G) log2(p) times
since G is idempotent; here we denote by G the adjacency matrix the DAG G. For part (2)

 3. The experiments were performed on a 64bit Ubuntu machine using one core of the Intel Core2 Duo CPU
     P8600 at 2.40GHz.

                                                                15
                 J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

Table 1: Average SID to true DAG for 100 simulation experiments with standard devia-
            tion, for diﬀerent n and p. For the methods that output a Markov equivalence
            class (CPC, PC and GES), two rows are shown: they represent DAGs from the
            equivalence class with the smallest and with the largest distance, i.e. the lower
            and upper bounds in (4) in Section 2.4.1. Smallest averages are highlighted.

                               n = 100

p GDSEEV         CPC           PC            GES          RAND

5 1.7 ± 2.2      2.9 ± 3.2     4.3 ± 4.7     3.3 ± 4.2    6.1 ± 4.0
                 8.8 ± 5.2     7.7 ± 5.2     6.9 ± 4.6

20  14.1 ± 10.5  22.8 ± 17.1   37.0 ± 26.8   24.4 ± 17.4  47.7 ± 28.8
                 63.3 ± 38.0   52.8 ± 30.1   33.1 ± 19.1

40  37.2 ± 27.2  56.7 ± 36.3   91.3 ± 58.3   58.9 ± 34.6  119.1 ± 63.8
                 147.5 ± 78.6  124.2 ± 66.4  65.9 ± 36.2

                               n = 1000

p GDSEEV         CPC           PC            GES          RAND

5 0.6 ± 1.6      1.7 ± 3.4     3.0 ± 4.7     1.9 ± 3.7    6.3 ± 5.0
                 7.0 ± 4.8     6.7 ± 4.8     6.3 ± 4.4

20  3.0 ± 6.7    7.4 ± 10.3    26.4 ± 28.7   8.3 ± 10.2   53.1 ± 36.6
                 40.0 ± 28.4   40.2 ± 27.5   23.4 ± 13.1

40  7.8 ± 10.2   13.8 ± 12.6   62.1 ± 45.5   19.7 ± 18.7  132.2 ± 79.8
                 89.8 ± 49.5   91.9 ± 49.3   43.9 ± 22.7

Table 2: Same experiment as in Table 1, this time reporting the average SHD to the true
            DAG. Smallest averages are highlighted.

                               n = 100

    p GDSEEV     CPC           PC            GES          RAND

    5 1.0 ± 1.1 3.1 ± 1.4 2.6 ± 1.4 2.7 ± 1.5 6.2 ± 2.2

    20 11.3 ± 3.1 13.4 ± 3.7 11.3 ± 3.1 15.0 ± 3.3 96.7 ± 47.8

    40 43.7 ± 6.6 27.2 ± 4.9 22.6 ± 4.6 45.4 ± 6.1 377.9 ± 195.8

                               n = 1000

    p GDSEEV     CPC           PC            GES          RAND

    5 0.3 ± 0.6 2.6 ± 1.5 2.3 ± 1.4 2.5 ± 1.5 6.0 ± 2.0

    20 2.8 ± 1.9 8.6 ± 2.7 7.7 ± 2.6 7.8 ± 2.7 98.4 ± 50.7

    40 10.6 ± 3.6 17.0 ± 3.5 15.3 ± 3.4 17.8 ± 4.0 393.5 ± 189.8

of (∗) we check whether the conditioning set blocks all non-directed paths from i to j (see
line 31 in Algorithm 1). It is the purpose of the function rondp (line 9 in Algorithm 1) to
compute all nodes that can be reached on a non-directed path.

                                                                16
SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

Sparse Graphs                                                                                       Dense Graphs

time (s)                                                                                                                                                                  ●
   0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                         time (s)
                                                                             0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5                                                       ●●
                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                 ●
5 10 20 30 40 50                                                                                                                 ●
                        p                                                                     ●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                              ●

                                                                                              5 10  20     30                                                                40  50

                                                                                                        p

Figure 6: Box plots for the processor time needed to compute the SID for one pair of random
             graphs (averaged over 100 pairs), for varying p and sparse (left) and dense graphs
             (right). The computational complexity roughly scales quadratic or cubic in p for
             sparse or dense graphs, respectively.

    Algorithm 2, also presented in the appendix, describes the function rondp that computes
all nodes reachable on non-directed paths. In a breadth-ﬁrst search we go through all
node-orientation combinations and compute the 2p × 2p reachabilityMatrix. Afterwards
we compute the corresponding PathMatrix (line 24 in Algorithm 2). We then start with
a vector reachableNodes (consisting of parents and children of node i) and read oﬀ all
reachable nodes from the reachabilityPathMatrix. We then ﬁlter out the nodes that are
reachable on a non-directed path.

    Note that in the whole procedure computing the PathMatrix is computationally the
most expensive part. Making sure that this computation is done only once for all j is
one reason why we do not use any existing implementation (e.g. for d-separation). The
worst case computational complexity for computing the SID between dense matrices is
O(p · log2(p) · f (p)), where squaring a matrix requires O(f (p)); a naive implementation
yields f (p) = p3 while Coppersmith and Winograd (1987) report f (p) = O(p2.375477), for
example. Sparse matrices lead to improved computational complexities, of course (see also
Section 3.3).

    We also implemented the steps required for computing the SID between a DAG and a
completed PDAG (both options from Section 2.4.1) using a function that enumerates all
DAGs from partially directed graph. Those steps, however, are not shown in the pseudo
code in order to ensure readability.

    Our software code for SID is provided as R-code on the ﬁrst author’s homepage.

5. Conclusions

We have proposed a new (pre-) distance, the Structural Intervention Distance (SID), be-
tween directed acyclic graphs and completed partially directed acyclic graphs. Since the
SID is a one-dimensional measure of distances between high-dimensional objects it does not

                                                                17
                                            J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

capture all aspects of the diﬀerence. The SID measures “closeness” between graphs in terms
of their capacities for causal eﬀects (intervention distributions). It is therefore well suited
for evaluating diﬀerent estimates of causal graphs. The distance diﬀers signiﬁcantly from
the widely used Structural Hamming Distance (SHD) and can therefore provide a useful
complement to existing measures. Based on known results for graphical characterization of
adjustment sets we have provided a representation of the SID that enabled us to develop an
eﬃcient algorithm for its computation. Simulations indicate that in order to draw reliable
causal conclusions from an estimated DAG (i.e. to obtain a small SID), we require more
samples than what is suggested by the SHD.

Acknowledgments

We thank Alain Hauser, Preetam Nandy and Marloes Maathuis for helpful discussions. We
also thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. The research leading
to these results has received funding from the People Programme (Marie Curie Actions) of
the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under REA grant
agreement no 326496.

Appendix A. Terminology for Directed Acyclic Graphs

We summarize here some well known facts about graphs, essentially taken from (Peters,
2012). Let G = (V, E) be a graph with V := {1, . . . , p}, E ⊂ V2 and corresponding random
variables X = (X1, . . . , Xp). A graph G1 = (V1, E1) is called a subgraph of G if V1 = V
and E1 ⊆ E; we then write G1 ≤ G. If additionally, E1 = E, we call G1 a proper subgraph
of G. A node i is called a parent of j if (i, j) ∈ E and a child if (j, i) ∈ E. The set of
parents of j is denoted by PAGj , the set of its children by CHGj . Two nodes i and j are
adjacent if either (i, j) ∈ E or (j, i) ∈ E. We call G fully connected if all pairs of nodes
are adjacent. We say that there is an undirected edge between two adjacent nodes i and
j if (i, j) ∈ E and (j, i) ∈ E; we denote this edge by i − j. An edge between two adjacent
nodes is directed if it is not undirected; if (i, j) ∈ E, we denote it by i → j. The skeleton
of G is the set of all edges without taking the direction into account, that is all (i, j), such
that (i, j) ∈ E or (j, i) ∈ E. The number of edges in a graph is the size of the skeleton,
i.e. undirected edges count as one.

    A path i1, . . . , in in G is a sequence of (at least two) distinct vertices i1, . . . , in, such
that there is an edge between ik and ik+1 for all k = 1, . . . , n − 1. If (ik, ik+1) ∈ E and
(ik+1, ik) ∈/ E for all k we speak of a directed path between i1 and in and call in a
descendant of i1. We denote all descendants of i by DEiG and all non-descendants of i by
NDGi . We call all a node j such that i is a descendant of j an ancestor of i and denote
the set by ANiG. A path i1, . . . , in is called a semi-directed cycle if (ij, ij+1) ∈ E for
j = 1, . . . , n with in+1 = i1 and at least one of the edges is oriented as ij → ij+1. If
(ik−1, ik) ∈ E and (ik+1, ik) ∈ E, as well as (ik, ik−1) ∈/ E and (ik, ik+1) ∈/ E, ik is called a
collider on this path. G is called a partially directed acyclic graph (PDAG) if there
is no directed cycle, i.e. no pair (j, k), such that there are directed paths from j to k and
from k to j. G is called a chain graph if there is no semi-directed cycle between any pair
of nodes. Two nodes j and k in a chain graph are called equivalent if there exists a path

                                                                18
SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

between j and k consisting only of undirected edges. A corresponding equivalence class
of nodes (i.e. a (maximal) set of nodes that is connected by undirected edges) is called a
chain component. G is called a directed acyclic graph (DAG) if it is a PDAG and
all edges are directed. A path in a DAG between i1 and in is blocked by a set S (with
neither i1 nor in in this set) whenever there is a node ik, such that one of the following two
possibilities hold: 1. ik ∈ S and ik−1 → ik → ik+1 or ik−1 ← ik ← ik+1 or ik−1 ← ik → ik+1;
or 2., ik−1 → ik ← ik+1 and neither ik nor any of its descendants is in S. We say that two
disjoint subsets of vertices A and B are d-separated by a third (also disjoint) subset S if
every path between nodes in A and B is blocked by S. The joint distribution L(X) is said
to be Markov with respect to the DAG G if

                                  A, B d-sep. by C ⇒ XA ⊥⊥ XB | XC

for all disjoint sets A, B, C. L(X) is said to be faithful to the DAG G if

                                  A, B d-sep. by C ⇐ XA ⊥⊥ XB | XC

for all disjoint sets A, B, C. Throughout this work, ⊥⊥ denotes (conditional) independence.
    We denote by M(G) the set of distributions that are Markov with respect to G:

                               M(G) := {L(X) : L(X) is Markov wrt G} .

Two DAGs G1 and G2 are Markov equivalent if M(G1) = M(G2). This is the case
if and only if G1 and G2 satisfy the same set of d-separations, that means the Markov
condition entails the same set of (conditional) independence conditions. A set of Markov
equivalent DAGs (so-called Markov equivalence class) can be represented by a completed
PDAG which can be characterized in terms of a chain graph with undirected and directed
edges (Andersson et al., 1997): this graph has a directed edge if all members of the Markov
equivalence class have such a directed edge, it has an undirected edge if some members of
the Markov equivalence class have an edge in the same direction and some members have
an edge in the other direction, and it has no edge if all members in the Markov equivalence
class have no corresponding edge.

Appendix B. Proof of Proposition 6

Let us denote by A the set of pairs (i, j) appearing in Deﬁnition 4 and by B the correspond-
ing set of pairs in Proposition 6. We will show that A = B.

A ⊆ B: Consider (i, j) ∈ A.
       Case (1): If Xj ∈ PAHXi, then pH(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) = p(xj). We will now show that
       pG(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) = p(xj) whenever Xi is not an ancestor of Xj in G (and therefore
       Xi must be an ancestor of Xj).

pG(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) =                     p(x1, . . . , xp | xˆi) dxnon-anc(j) dxanc(j)

                         anc(j) non-anc(j)

(†)                                       p(xk | xpa(k)) dxanc(j)
=

                         anc(j) k∈anc(j)

=                                           p(x1, . . . , xp) dxnon-anc(j) dxanc(j) = p(xj )

                         anc(j) non-anc(j)

                         19
                                            J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

       Equation (†) holds since parents of ancestors of j are ancestors of j, too. One can
       therefore integrate out all non-ancestors (starting at the sink nodes).
       Case (2): If, on the other hand, Xj ∈ PAHXi, then it follows by Lemma 5(i) that PAHXi
       does not satisfy (∗). In both cases we have (i, j) ∈ B.

A ⊇ B: Now consider (i, j) ∈ B.
       Case (1): If Xj ∈ PAHXi, then, again, pH(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) = p(xj) and Xj ∈ DEXG i.
       Consider a linear Gaussian structural equation model with error variances being one
       and equations Xk = ∈paGk 1 · X + Nk, corresponding to the graph structure G. It
       then follows that pG(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) = p(xj).
       Case (2): If Xj ∈ PAXHi, then PAXHi does not satisfy (∗) and Lemma 5(ii) implies
       pG(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) = pH(xj | do(Xi = xˆi)). In both cases we have (i, j) ∈ A.

Appendix C. Proof of Proposition 7

  ⇐: Assume that G ≤ H. We will use Proposition 6 to show that the SID is zero. If
       j ∈ DEiG then j ∈ DEHi which implies that j ∈/ PAHi . It therefore remains to show
       that any set Z that satisﬁes (∗) for (H, i, j) satisﬁes (∗) for for (G, i, j), too. The ﬁrst
       part of the condition is satisﬁed since any node that lies on a directed path in G lies
       on a directed path in H. The second part holds because any non-directed path in G is
       also a path in H and must therefore be blocked by Z. If a path is blocked in a DAG
       it is always blocked in the smaller DAG, too.

  ⇒: Suppose now that G contains an edge i → j and that i ∈/ PAjH. We now construct
       an observational distribution p(.) according to Xk = Nk for all k = j, Xj = Xi + Nj
       and Nk i∼id N (0, 1) for all k. This distribution is certainly Markov with respect to
       G. We ﬁnd for any xˆj that pG(xi | do(Xj = xˆj)) = p(xi) and at the same time
       pH(xi | do(Xj = xˆj)) = p(xi | xˆj) = p(xi). Therefore, the SID is diﬀerent from zero.

Appendix D. Proof of Proposition 8

The diﬀerent statements can be proved as follows:
(1a) When the SHD is zero, each node has the same set of parents in G and H. Therefore

       all adjustment sets are valid and the SID is zero, too.

(1b) The bound clearly holds since a SHD of one can change the set of parents of at most
       two nodes. Extending the example shown in Figure 2 from Example 1 to p−2 diﬀerent
       Y nodes proves that the bound is sharp.

  (2) Choosing G the empty graph and H (any) fully connected graph yields the result.

Appendix E. Computing causal eﬀects for linear Gaussian structural
   equation models

Consider a linear Gaussian structural equation model with known parameters. The co-
variance matrix ΣX of the p random variables can then be computed from the structural

                                                                20
                                     SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs
coeﬃcients and the noise variances. For a given graph we are also able to compute the
causal eﬀects analytically. Since the intervention distribution L(Xj | do(Xi = xˆi)) is again
Gaussian with mean depending linearly on xˆi and variance not depending on xˆi, we can
summarize it by the so-called causal eﬀect

                                                 ∂
                                       Cij := ∂xˆ E [Xj | do(Xi = xˆi)] .
Let us denote by Σ2 the submatrix of ΣX with rows and columns corresponding to Xi, PAXi,
and by Σ1 the (1 × (#PAXi + 1))-vector corresponding to the row from Xj and columns
from Xi, PAXi of ΣX. Then,
                                        Cij = Σ1 · Σ−2 1 · (1, 0 . . . , 0)T .

                                                                21
                       J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

Appendix F. Algorithms

We present here pseudo code of two algorithms for computing the SID.

Algorithm 1 Computing structural intervention distance
 1: input two adjacency matrices G and H of size p × p.

 2: incorrectCausalEf f ects ← ZeroMatrix(p, p)
 3: PathMatrix ← computePathMatrix(G)
 4: for i = 1 to p do
 5: paG ← which(G[, i] == 1) # parents of i in G
 6: paH ← which(H[, i] == 1) # parents of i in H
 7: G˜ ← G without edges leaving paH with a tail (paH →)
 8: PathMatrix2 ← computePathMatrix(G˜)
 9: reachableOnN onDirectedP ath ← rondp(G,i,paH,PathMatrix,PathMatrix2)
10: for j = i from 1 to p do

11: ijGN ull, ijHN ull, f inished ← false

12: if PathMatrix[i, j] == 0 then

13:  ijGN ull ← true # G predicts the causal eﬀect to be zero

14:  end if

15: if j is parent from i in H then

16:  ijHN ull ← true # H predicts the causal eﬀect to be zero

17:  end if

18: if !ijGN ull and ijHN ull then

19:  incorrectCausalEﬀects[i, j] ← 1

20:  f inished ← true # one mistake if only H predicts zero

21:  end if

22: if ijGN ull and ijHN ull or paG == paH then

23:  f inished ← true # no mistakes if both predictions coincide

24:  end if

25:  if !ﬁnished then

26:  childrenOnDirectedP ath ← children of i in G that have j as a descendant

27:  if sum(PathMatrix[childrenOnDirectedP ath, paH])> 0 then

28:  incorrectCausalEﬀects[i, j] ← 1 # part (1)

29:  end if

30:  if reachableOnN onDirectedP ath[j] == 1 then

31:  incorrectCausalEﬀects[i, j] ← 1 # part (2)

32:  end if

33:  end if

34: end for
35: end for

36: output sum(incorrectCausalEﬀects)

                                       22
                                     SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

Algorithm 2 Finding all reachable nodes on non-directed paths (rondp)
 1: input adjacency matrix G of size p × p, node i, PaH, PathMatrix, PathMatrix2.

 2: P ai ← which(G[, i] == 1) # parents of i in G
 3: Chi ← which(G[i, ] == 1) # children of i in G
 4: toCheck ← P ai + p and Chi # an index > p indicates that this node is reached

                                                  # with an outgoing edge, ≤ p with an incoming edge
 5: reachableN odes ← P ai and Chi
 6: reachableOnN onDirectedP ath ← P ai + p · 1length(P ai)
 7: G[i, Chi] ← 0
 8: G[i, P ai] ← 0

 9: for all currentN ode in toCheck do
10: P acN ← which(G[, currentN ode] == 1)

        # If one of the Pa of currentN ode (cN) is reachable and is not included in P aH,
        # then cN is reachable, too (i.e. ∃ path from i that is not blocked by P aH).
11: P acN 2 ← P acN setMinus P aH
12: reachabilityMatrix[P acN 2, currentN ode] ← 1 # same index rule as for toCheck

13: reachabilityMatrix[P acN 2 + p, currentN ode] ← 1
        # If currentN ode (cN) is reachable with → cN and cN is
        # an ancestor of P aH, then parents are reachable, too.

14: if currentN ode is an ancestor of P aH then
15: reachabilityMatrix[currentN ode, P acN + p] ← 1
16: add P acN to toCheck # toCheck is a set; it contains each index only once
17: end if

        # If currentN ode (cN) is reachable with ← cN and cN is
        # not in P aH, then parents are reachable, too.
18: if currentN ode is not in P aH then
19: reachabilityMatrix[currentN ode + p, P acN + p] ← 1
20: add P acN to toCheck # toCheck is a set; it contains each index only once
21: end if

22: . . . # Apply analogous rules to the children ChcN of currentNode.
23: end for

24: reachabilityPathMatrix ← computePathMatrix(reachabilityMatrix)
25: update reachableN odes using reachabilityPathMatrix
26: update reachableOnN onDirectedP ath using reachabilityPathMatrix

     # We may have missed some nodes: if there is a directed (non-blocked) path
     # from i to k, then all parents of k are reachable from i on a non-directed path.
27: add more nodes to reachableOnN onDirectedP ath: Use PathMatrix2 to look for nodes
     j as in i → . . . → k ← j (k being a descendant of i with no node from PaH in between)

28: remove all entries between k and j in computePathMatrix
29: update reachableOnN onDirectedP ath using reachabilityPathMatrix
30: reachableOnN onDirectedP ath ← {j | j or j + p ∈ reachableOnN onDirectedP ath}

31: output reachableOnN onDirectedP ath 23
                                            J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann

References

S. Acid and L. M. de Campos. Searching for Bayesian network structures in the space of
   restricted acyclic partially directed graphs. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research,
   18:445–490, 2003.

S.A. Andersson, D. Madigan, and M.D. Perlman. A characterization of Markov equivalence
   classes for acyclic digraphs. Annals of Statistics, 25:505–541, 1997.

D.M. Chickering. Optimal structure identiﬁcation with greedy search. Journal of Machine
   Learning Research, 3:507–554, 2002.

T. Claassen, J. M. Mooij, and T. Heskes. Learning sparse causal models is not NP-hard.
   In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
   (UAI), 2013.

D. Colombo, M. Maathuis, M. Kalisch, and T. Richardson. Learning high-dimensional
   directed acyclic graphs with latent and selection variables. Annals of Statistics, 40:294–
   321, 2012.

D. Coppersmith and S. Winograd. Matrix multiplication via arithmetic progressions. In
   Proceedings of the 19th annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, 1987.

M. de Jongh and M. J. Druzdzel. A comparison of structural distance measures for causal
   Bayesian network models. In M. Klopotek, A. Przepiorkowski, S. T. Wierzchon, and
   K. Trojanowski, editors, Recent Advances in Intelligent Information Systems, Challeng-
   ing Problems of Science, Computer Science series, pages 443–456. Academic Publishing
   House EXIT, 2009.

D. Koller and N. Friedman. Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques.
   MIT Press, 2009.

S. Lauritzen. Graphical Models. Oxford University Press, 1996.

M. Maathuis and D. Colombo. A generalized backdoor criterion. ArXiv e-prints
   (1307.5636v2), 2013.

C. Meek. Causal inference and causal explanation with background knowledge. In Pro-
   ceedings of the 11th Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI),
   1995.

J. Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, 2nd
   edition, 2009.

J. Peters. Restricted structural equation models for causal inference. PhD Thesis (ETH
   Zurich), 2012. http://dx.doi.org/10.3929/ethz-a-007597940.

J. Peters and P. Bu¨hlmann. Identiﬁability of Gaussian structural equation models with
   equal error variances. Biometrika, 101:219–228, 2014.

                                                                24
                                     SID for Evaluating Causal Graphs

J. Ramsey, J. Zhang, and P. Spirtes. Adjacency-faithfulness and conservative causal infer-
   ence. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
   gence (UAI), 2006.

T. Richardson and P. Spirtes. Ancestral graph Markov models. Annals of Statistics, 30:
   962–1030, 2002.

I. Shpitser and J. Pearl. Identiﬁcation of joint interventional distributions in recursive semi-
   markovian causal models. In Proceedings of the 21st National Conference on Artiﬁcial
   Intelligence (AAAI) - Volume 2, 2006.

I. Shpitser, T. J. Van der Weele, and J. M. Robins. On the validity of covariate adjust-
   ment for estimating causal eﬀects (corrected version). In Proceedings of the 26th Annual
   Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI), 2010.

P. Spirtes, C. Glymour, and R. Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search. MIT Press,
   2nd edition, 2000.

J. Textor and M. Liskiewicz. Adjustment criteria in causal diagrams: An algorithmic
   perspective. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial
   Intelligence (UAI), 2011.

I. Tsamardinos, L. E. Brown, and C. F. Aliferis. The max-min hill-climbing Bayesian
   network structure learning algorithm. Machine Learning, 65:31–78, 2006.

                                                                25
