```yaml
concept: attention-visualization
status: partial
synthesis: >
  In the original Transformer paper ("Attention Is All You Need," Vaswani et al.,
  2017), the appendix includes qualitative examples of encoder self-attention
  distributions, rendered as colored edges between tokens of an input sentence,
  to argue that self-attention layers learn interpretable structural relations
  rather than acting as an opaque mixing operation.

  On long-distance dependency resolution: one example shows the attention
  distribution for the word "making" in a sentence built around the phrase
  "making...more difficult." Several attention heads in an upper encoder layer
  (layer 5 of 6) attend sharply back to the distant token(s) that complete this
  phrase, skipping over the intervening words. This is presented as evidence
  that self-attention gives the model a direct, constant-path-length route to
  connect tokens that are far apart in the sequence, which the paper contrasts
  with the growing path length required by recurrent or convolutional
  connections to link the same tokens.

  A second example is offered as an instance of anaphora resolution: attention
  from the pronoun "its" is shown for two different heads, both producing very
  sharp (low-entropy) distributions concentrated on the noun phrase the pronoun
  refers to. The heads' attention effectively performs coreference/anaphora
  resolution as a side effect of the self-attention computation, without any
  explicit coreference supervision.

  On head specialization: the paper shows two heads from the same encoder
  self-attention layer producing visibly different attention patterns over the
  same sentence, which it interprets as heads having "learned to perform
  different tasks," with some heads' behavior appearing tied to syntactic
  structure of the sentence. Combined with the anaphora example, this supports
  the broader claim that multi-head attention lets separate heads specialize
  in distinct relations (e.g., local syntactic agreement vs. longer-range
  coreference-like links) rather than all heads redundantly computing the same
  mixture.

  Caveats inherent to the source material: these are hand-picked, qualitative
  visualizations offered as illustrative evidence, not a systematic
  quantitative study of head specialization (that line of analysis was taken
  up by later interpretability work, e.g. Clark et al. 2019 "What Does BERT
  Look At?" and Voita et al. 2019 on head pruning/specialization, which is out
  of scope for this note).
resources:
- title: "Attention Is All You Need (Vaswani et al., 2017) — arXiv:1706.03762"
  note: >
    Primary source; qualitative attention visualizations appear in the
    appendix figures (long-distance dependency example, anaphora-resolution
    heads, and a pair of heads showing distinct syntactic-like behavior on
    the same sentence).
unresolved:
- Could not re-fetch or re-verify the exact figure numbers/captions and exact
  sentence examples against the live arXiv source in this session — WebSearch
  and WebFetch calls were both blocked by permission restrictions in this
  execution environment (no approval available to grant them), so the
  synthesis above relies on prior knowledge of the paper rather than a fresh
  citation-checked read.
- Whether head specialization is consistent/reproducible beyond the
  hand-picked examples shown (i.e. quantitative evidence of specialization)
  is not addressed by these figures and would need later interpretability
  literature to answer properly.
sources_consulted:
- attempted: WebSearch query on Figure 3/4/5 attention visualization — blocked, permission not granted
- attempted: WebFetch on arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 — blocked, permission not granted
- fallback: model prior knowledge of Vaswani et al. 2017 appendix content (no live fetch performed)
```
